---
title: "Generators of Fields"
date: "2023-05-25"
time: "20:13"
tags:
- galois-theory
---
**Definition (Finitely Generated Extension).** Let $K$ be a [field extension](notes/Galois%20Theory/Basic%20Definitions%20for%20Fields.md) of $F$. if $X$ is a subset of $K$, then the ring $F[X]$ generated by $F$ and $X$ is the intersection of all subrings of $K$ that contain $F$ and $X$. The field $F(X)$ generated by $F$ and $X$ is the intersection of all subfields of $K$ that contain $F$ and $X$. If $X = \lbrace a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \rbrace$ is a finite set, we write 
$$
F[X] = F[a\_1, \ldots , a\_n]
$$and 
$$
F(X) = F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n).
$$If $X$ is finite, we call $F(X)$ a *finitely generated extension* of $F$. 

The following gives a more concrete description of the ring $F[X]$ and the field $F(X)$. 

**Proposition.** Let $K$ be a [field extension](notes/Representation%20Theory/Basic%20Definitions.md) of $F$ and let $a \in K$. Then 
$$
F[a] = \lbrace f(a) \mid f(x) \in F[x] \rbrace
$$and 
$$
F(a) = \lbrace f(a)/g(a) \mid f, g \in F[x], g(a) \neq 0 \rbrace.
$$Moreover, $F(a)$ is the quotient field of $F[a]$. 

*Proof.* The evaluation map $ev_a \colon F[x] \to K$ has image $\lbrace f(a) \mid f \in F[x] \rbrace$, so this set is a subring of $K$. If $R$ is a subring of $K$ that contains $F$ and $a$, then $f(a) \in R$ for any $f(x) \in F[x]$ by the closure of addition and multiplication. Therefore, $\lbrace f(a) \mid f(x) \in F[x] \rbrace$ is contained in all subrings of $K$ hat contain $F$ and $a$. Thus $F[a] = \lbrace f(a) \mid f(x) \in F[x] \rbrace$. The quotient field of $F[a]$ is the set $\lbrace f(a)/g(a) \mid f, g \in F[x], g(a) \neq 0 \rbrace$. It clearly is contained in any subfield of $K$ that contains $F[a]$; hence it is equal to $F(a)$. 

We can extend this idea to fields generated by more than one element. The proof is almost identical to the one above. 

**Proposition.** Let $K$ be a field extension of $F$ and let $a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \in K$. Then 
$$
F[a\_1, \ldots, a\_n] = \lbrace f(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n) \mid f \in F[x\_1, \ldots , x\_n] \rbrace
$$and 
$$
F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n) = \left\\{\frac{f(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n)}{g(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n)} \mid f, g \in F[x\_1, \ldots , x\_n], g(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \neq 0 \right\\},
$$and $F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n)$ is the quotient field of $F[a\_1, \ldots , a\_n]$. 

This proposition still only works for finitely generated field extensions. We want a way to describe infinite field extensions. The following proposition helps us turn questions about arbitrary field extensions into questions about finitely generated ones. 

**Proposition.** Let $K$ be a field extension of $F$ and let $X$ be a subset of $K$. If $\alpha \in F(X)$, then $\alpha \in F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n)$ for some $a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \in X$. Therefore, 
$$
F(X) = \bigcup \lbrace F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n) \mid a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \in X \rbrace,
$$where the union is over all finite subsets of $X$. 

*Proof.* The first statement is always true since if $\alpha \in F(X)$, then $\alpha \in F(\alpha)$ always. Next, each field $F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n)$ with the $a\_i \in X$ is contained in $F(X)$. Hence we get the inclusion 
$$
\bigcup \lbrace F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n) \mid a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \in X \rbrace \subseteq F(X).
$$This union contains $F$ and $X$, so if it is a field, then it is equal to $F(X)$, since $F(X)$ is the smallest subfield of $K$ containing $F$ and $X$. To show that this union is a field, let $\alpha, \beta \in\bigcup \lbrace F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n) \mid a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \in X \rbrace$. Then there are $a\_i, b\_i \in X$ with $\alpha \in F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n)$ and $\beta \in F(b\_1, \ldots , b\_m)$. Then both $\alpha$ and $\beta$ are contained in $F(a\_1, \ldots, a\_n, b\_1, \ldots, b\_m)$, so $\alpha \pm \beta, \alpha \beta$, and $\alpha/\beta$, if $\beta \neq 0$ are all contained in $\bigcup \lbrace F(a\_1, \ldots , a\_n) \mid a\_1, \ldots , a\_n \in X \rbrace$. This union is then a field, so we get the desired equality. 

